the Netherlands based World Press photo
competition has announced its winners
for the best visual journalism of the
past year the winners captured some of
the most powerful snapshots photographer
lanai's story Val Baba one for Story of
the Year her portraits show people with
dementia and the family members who care
for them in Madagascar where the disease
is little public
awareness Alejandro seara documented
migrants at the northern border of
Mexico for six years Julia cova's
photographs of ukrainians living through
two years of war with Russia won the
open format
award but it was the work of reuter's
photojournalist in Gaza Muhammad Salam
which was awarded photo of the Year His
Image taken just 10 days into Israel's
war on Gaza shows a woman named inas Abu
mamar cradling the body of her niece
Sally the little girl was killed by an
Israeli missile attack on her home in
Khan
J zi is executive director at the World
Press photo Foundation she says
photojournalism is a vital part of
documenting conflicts around the world
good to have you with us every conflict
usually has an iconic photo is it fair
to say though that in this conflict in
Gaza we've seen more iconic photos than
usual I don't know if you can say that
we've seen more iconic photos than usual
ual but um we definitely have seen a lot
of photos and a lot of photos I think
what is different is that we've seen a
lot of photos coming from Palestinian
photographers especially from
photographers who are from Kazu and I
think that is what makes them different
this time because of course there has
been so much pressure on um on press to
be able to go and have access to Gaza
and that is why these images are so
important today to be shown and to be to
be shown all over the
world and related to that those who do
have access Palestinian journalists in
particular they're paying an
unprecedented price in this conflict for
us just to see these pictures
right yes I mean um there has been 97 as
of yesterday there have been 97
journalists who have been killed in only
this Gaza Israel uh War more than there
has ever been in any other War actually
at this point and of course most of them
are Palestinians and they don't only pay
with their lives but they also pay with
their health and their mental health and
uh it is really really devastating there
is pressure on press Freedom all over
the world but r at this point is really
a big case study of this pressure that
exists around the world on press Freedom
can they take comfort in the thought
that it hasn't been in vain have the
photos and the videos been the key one
of the key elements if not the key
element that has really shaped public
opinion more than ever in this Gaza in
this round of Gaza
conflict absolutely today
photojournalists especially
photojournalists really act as witnesses
to what is happening around the world
especially and in Gaza specifically
today and when when I spoke to Muhammad
salm telling him that he had one
worldpress photo he told me that you
know it was totally schizophrenic uh
experience because he was of course you
know we needed to find a place where he
had internet he was in a shelter um he
was in ra at that point in time he
hadn't eaten in a couple of days and um
and he was like I just go out and I'm in
a war zone and here I am you know with
having my dream come true which is to
become the photo of the year of
worldpress photo
but um he was very humbled by the fact
that his image was going to be able to
be seen by billions of people around the
world and that is the essence of the
work that we do at worldpress photo is
to be able to give a new leg to give a
new life and increase that visibility to
as many people as possible in order to
be able to
bring discussions to be able to bring
some kind of solution and especially to
be able to bring empathy and I think
that is what's so special about this
photo of the world this year uh of the
World Press photo is that it is not you
know a violent image it isn't a violent
in the sense that there's blood it's a
very um individual image it's a very
zoomed in image on this one woman with
her niece um whose faces you can't even
see but with whom you relate immediately
on an emotional level too and so it's
not only today it's G but it's not only
G this is the human impact and the human
suffering that happens on Wars and
conflicts around the world you know the
advert of Television radio may have
taken or raised some question about the
future of still photography or its
impact in power has social media revived
some of that power
now well in a way I guess it has but in
a different way in another way I think
that today you react to images in a very
different way than the way that you used
to today I was reading someplace other
day that um on social media people just
spent not even a second three qus of a
second looking at an image and you know
even less time reacting to it so
basically this immediate immediacy this
urgency of people to feel to react Etc
um kind of work in polarizing U people
don't about this and uh so it it it has
a double it has a double s all right
thank you so much for your thoughts on
this thank you so
much make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer